West 0.9 docs (#31241)
zephyrproject-rtos/zephyr: doc/guides/west/manifest.rst

  :ref:`west-extensions` for details.
- ``import``: Optional. If ``true``, imports projects from manifest files in
  the given repository into the current manifest. See
  :ref:`west-manifest-import` for details.
- ``groups``: Optional, a list of groups the project belongs to. See
  :ref:`west-manifest-groups` for details.

> - ``submodules``: Optional. If present, ``west update`` will also update `Git

Reviewer: It's a bool or a list, so this sentence is technically not accurate? i.e. `submodules: false`

Author: Good catch, thanks. Will change to:

```
You can use this to make ``west update`` also update `Git submodules`_
defined by the project.
```

.. _pathlib:
   https://docs.python.org/3/library/pathlib.html#pathlib.PurePath.match

Allowlists override blocklists if both are given. For example, if a project is

> blocklisted by path, then allowlisted by name, it will still be imported.

Reviewer: Do those verbs actually exist? :) not sure if "blocked" and "allowed" would be better here

Reviewer: Same for other instance further down.

Author: Ah, the perils of search and replace. Thanks.

         path: libraries/lib2
         url: https://git.example.com/mainline/lib2

> If a allowlist had not been used, the ``lib`` project from the mainline

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If an allowlist had not been used, the ``lib`` project from the mainline
```

- If the value is a sequence, its elements are recursively imported in the
  order they appear.

.. _west-manifest-groups:

Project Groups and Active Projects
**********************************

You can use the ``groups`` keys briefly described :ref:`above
<west-manifest-files>` to place projects into groups. The ``groups`` key can be

> a project or top level manifest attribute, like this:

Reviewer 2: When reading this, a user might think that the `groups` key is is used for same purpose, placing a project in a group, regardless of whether the `groups` key is placed at project or manifest level.

But the fact is, that the `groups` key at project level describes to which groups a project belongs, and at manifest level it specifies what groups to en-/disable.

Could you re-phrase this ?
Sorry for not having a proposal here.

Reviewer 3: > But the fact is, that the groups key at project level describes to which groups a project belongs, and at manifest level it specifies what groups to en-/disable.

I find it unfortunate that these two different keys have the same name.

Author: > I find it unfortunate that these two different keys have the same name.

Would you like to propose an alternative? We haven't released this yet. I'm open to suggestions.

Reviewer 2: Ok, let me give this a try, feel free to improve further:

>  At project level the ``groups`` defines the groups to which the project belong, at the top level manifest attribute the ``groups`` enable or disable groups, like this:

Author: > Ok, let me give this a try, feel free to improve further:

@tejlmand I think @marc-hb is saying he would like to rename "manifest: groups:" to "manifest: something-different-than-groups:".

Reviewer 2: ok.
but I still think it would be valuable for the reader if it was highlighted that the two `groups` key are used for different purposes.
But this is just minor, as it will be clear in later sections.

Reviewer 3: How about `manifest.projects.project.in_groups`. Besides avoiding the collision with the other key, `in_groups` also reduces IMHO the potential confusion between `- groupA` in this YAML list and `-groupA` elsewhere, I mean imagine someone completely new to west, then the `in_` prefix makes it IMHO harder to read too fast and mistake for a `-` exclusion:
```
  in_groups:
   - groupA
```

For the other key, how about: `manifest.groups_filter` as in Python list comprehension etc.

Author: > How about `manifest.projects.project.in_groups`

I'm not in favor of this change. At the API level, a `west.manifest.Project` has a `groups` attribute which corresponds to this data, so making this key `groups` is concise and consistent.

> For the other key, how about: manifest.groups_filter as in Python list comprehension etc.

I'm OK with something like this.

I guess you meant this to apply to both the configuration file and the manifest. This also impacts the `west update --groups` option.

I'd like to use `groups-filter` instead of `groups_filter` for consistency with other things (like `west-commands`, `repo-path`).

------------------------------------

**Summary of proposed change**

1. In YAML:

```yaml
manifest:
  projects:
     - name: myproject
       groups: # stays the same
         - foo
         - bar
  groups-filter: [-foo,-bar] # changes from 'groups' to 'groups-filter'
```

2. In config: the `manifest.groups` configuration option becomes `manifest.groups-filter`.
3. In command line options: the new `--groups` option in `west update` becomes `--groups-filter`.

------------------------------------

Thoughts from @marc-hb  @carlescufi @tejlmand and others?

Reviewer 3: > I'm not in favor of this change.

OK, as long as one of them is renamed then they will differ from each other which I think is the main goal. That's why I tried to give options for either.

> I guess you meant this to apply to both the configuration file and the manifest. 

I didn't look that far but sure.

> I'd like to use groups-filter instead of groups_filter for consistency with other things (like west-commands, repo-path).

+1

Reviewer 2: I think `groups` as now is fine, but I also think `groups-filter` is just as good.

No preference for one or the other.

Reviewer: As long as we rename this to `group-filter`, I am OK with renaming the manifest-wide option, alongside the config and command-line ones.

     groups: ...

You can allow or block project groups. Projects whose groups are all blocked
are *inactive*; west essentially ignores inactive projects unless explicitly
requested not to.

Project Groups
==============

Inside ``manifest: projects:``, you can add a project to one or more groups.
The ``groups`` key in this case is a list of group names. Group names are
strings.

For example, in this manifest fragment:

.. code-block:: yaml

  manifest:
    projects:
      - name: project-1
        groups:
          - groupA
      - name: project-2
        groups:
          - groupB
          - groupC
      - name: project-3

The projects are in these groups:

- ``project-1``: one group, named ``groupA``
- ``project-2``: two groups, named ``groupB`` and ``groupC``
- ``project-3``: no groups

Project group names must not contain commas (,), colons (:), or whitespace.

Group names must not begin with a dash (-), but they may contain dashes
elsewhere in their names: ``foo-bar`` is a valid group name, but ``-foo-bar``
is not.

Group names are otherwise arbitrary strings. Group names are case sensitive.

As a restriction, no project may use both ``import:`` and ``groups:``. (This

> avoids some edge cases whose semantics are difficult to specify.)

Reviewer 3: I disagree. Mentioning edge cases gives the important information this will likely never supported and some idea why in very few words. Dropping this can leave the wrong expectation that this could come in the near future.

> avoids some edge cases whose semantics are difficult to specify.)

Author: I think it's important for the reasons @marc-hb describes.

> avoids some edge cases whose semantics are difficult to specify.)

Reviewer 2: accepted.

This ``groups`` list is an ordinary YAML list, so you could have also written
this fragment like this:

.. code-block:: yaml

   manifest:
     groups:
       - -groupA
       - -groupB

However, this syntax is harder to read and therefore discouraged.

Only the **top level manifest file's** ``manifest: groups:`` value has any
effect. The ``manifest: groups:`` values in any :ref:`imported manifests
<west-manifest-import>` are ignored.

In addition to the manifest file, you can control the project group allowlist
and blocklist using the ``manifest.groups`` configuration option. This option
is a comma-separated list of groups. To allow a group, add its name to the
list. To block a group, add its name prefixed by a dash (``-``). For example,
setting ``manifest.groups`` to ``groupA,-groupB`` allows ``groupA``, and blocks
``groupB``.

The value of the configuration option overrides any data in the manifest file.
You can think of this as if the ``manifest.groups`` configuration option is
appended to the ``manifest: groups:`` list from YAML, with "last entry wins"
semantics.

Active and Inactive Projects
============================

> All projects are *active* by default. A project is *inactive* if it has groups,
> all of which are blocked. This is the only way to make a project inactive:
> projects with no groups are active, as are projects with one or more allowed
> groups.

Reviewer 2: If I didn't knew earlier discussion, this would be a very hard section to read.

How about:
```suggestion
All projects are *active* by default. Projects with no groups are always *active*.
A project is *inactive* if all the groups, to which it belongs, are blocked.
```

Reviewer 3: This gave me pause too and I even tried to come with some better phrasing. Then I realize it takes some time to mentally picture some Venn diagrams from pure text and that my rephrasing attempts to shorten that time were making very little difference. I'm not convinced the suggestion is easier to parse.

This being said, have you thought about using the word "precedence", something like: "in other words, explicitly allowing takes precedence over blocking".

Author: @tejlmand 's suggestion has the benefit of being shorter. I'll take it.

The ``manifest.groups`` configuration option is set to ``-groupA,-groupB``
(you can ensure this by running ``west config manifest.groups --
"-groupA,-groupB"``).

In this case, both ``groupA`` and ``groupB`` are blocked.

Therefore, projects ``foo`` and ``bar`` are both inactive.

.. _west-manifest-submodules:

Git Submodules in Projects
**************************

You can use the ``submodules`` keys briefly described :ref:`above
<west-manifest-files>` to force ``west update`` to also handle any `Git
submodules`_ configured in project's git repository. The ``submodules`` key can
appear inside ``projects``, like this:

.. code-block:: YAML

   manifest:
     projects:
       - name: some-project
         submodules: ...

The ``submodules`` key can be a boolean or a list of mappings. We'll describe
these in order.

Option 1: Boolean
=================

This is the easiest way to use ``submodules``.

If ``submodules`` is ``true`` as a ``projects`` attribute, ``west update`` will
update the project's Git submodules whenever it updates the project itself. If
it's ``false`` or missing, it has no effect.

For example, let's say you have a source code repository ``foo``, which has

> some submodules, and you want ``west update`` to keep them in sync, along with

Reviewer 4: It's quite understandable that this way is used for updating all submodules, but I would just emphasize it by: "... and you want ``west update`` to keep all of them in sync ...".

another project named ``bar`` in the same workspace.

You can do that with this manifest file:

.. code-block:: yaml

   manifest:
     projects:
       - name: foo
         submodules: true
       - name: bar

Here, ``west update`` will initialize and update all submodules in ``foo``. If
``bar`` has any submodules, they are ignored, because ``bar`` does not have a
``submodules`` value.

Option 2: List of mappings
==========================

The ``submodules`` key may be a list of mappings. Each element in the list
defines the name of the submodule to update, and the path -- relative to the
project's absolute path in the workspace -- to use for the submodule.

For example, let's say you have a source code repository ``foo``, which has
many submodules, and you want ``west update`` to just keep one of them in sync,
along with another project named ``bar`` in the same workspace.

You can do that with this manifest file:

.. code-block:: yaml

   manifest:
     projects:
       - name: foo

>          submodules:

Reviewer 4: I would recommend adding one more submodule in order to demonstrate the list having multiple (at least two) elements.
For example:
```
- name: foo
   submodules:
      - name: foo-first-sub
        path: path/of/first_submodule/you/want
      - name: foo-second-sub
        path: path/of/second_submodule/you/want
- name: bar
```

Reviewer 2: I got to think.

Should we create an enhancement task here ?
What if `foo-first-sub` also contains submodules that I want, but I still don't want to enable all submodules for `foo`.

Reviewer 4: The current implementation will update `foo-first-sub` and all of its submodules recursively, so I guess that addresses your question. Another question could be - what if `foo-first-sub` also contains submodules and I don't want to update them, but only the `foo-first-sub`. The second use case is currently not possible to do, as all submodules are updated recursively.

Reviewer 3: I think someone who has complex submodules need should just disable them in west. Submodules are complex enough, if/when I have to actually deal with submodules the last thing I'd want is an incomplete layer of indirection on top of them. I see this new feature as a basic, simple "download all the pieces" feature for the users who do NOT have to touch submodules and don't even want to know about them.

Reviewer 2: > The current implementation will update foo-first-sub and all of its submodules recursively, 

Then that is a very important piece of information that is missing.

- If the value is a sequence, its elements are recursively imported in the
  order they appear.

.. _west-manifest-groups:

Project Groups and Active Projects
**********************************

You can use the ``groups`` keys briefly described :ref:`above

> <west-manifest-files>` to put projects into groups. The ``groups`` key can be a

Reviewer: ```suggestion
<west-manifest-files>` to place projects into groups. The ``groups`` key can be a
```
maybe?

project or top level manifest attribute, like this:

.. code-block:: yaml

   manifest:
     projects:
       - name: some-project
         groups: ...

>      groups: ...

Reviewer: Can you move this above `projects:` so that  the order in the file matches the description above?

Author: I don't follow this one. The description above says:

```
The ``groups`` key can be
a project or top level manifest attribute
```

This ordering matches that description.

Reviewer: Oh, I misread the "top-level attribute" sentence. You are indeed right.

> You can allow or block project groups. Projects whose groups are all blocked

Reviewer: I wonder if we should use "enable" and "disable" instead of "allow" and "block". To me the former feels truer to the original intent, but this is just a suggestion.

Reviewer: Same for other instances below

Author: I'm trying to adopt 'allow' and 'block' as consistent replacements for 'white' and 'black' in general here, so I'd prefer to keep as-is if that's OK.

Reviewer: Yes, but isn't enabling or disabling groups conceptually different from allowing or blocking projects? From my perspective it is, because projects are allowed or blocked directly, whereas enabling or disabling groups then has an impact on what projects end up being active or inactive, which is different from them being allowed or blocked.

Reviewer 2: when using `active` and `inactive`, then I feel `enable` and `disable` are fitting better.
But that's just my feeling as non-native English speaker.

Reviewer 3: > Yes, but isn't enabling or disabling groups conceptually different from allowing or blocking projects? 

This question confused me a lot because you crossed the adjectives and the names. Did you do that on purpose to illustrate your own confusion?

Here's my non-native speaker perspective too:
- The adjectives active and inactive sound (to me) like "final states", they do not like some indirect desire that gets combined with and can takes precedence over others desires/groups. So it's perfect for projects.
- The verbs allow/block do sound like indirect desires. So they're good for groups.
- At first I found the verbs enable/disable sounded better than allow/block because they don't have any security connotation, so they reflect the intent better. However they feel less "indirect" to me, maybe because it's more common to combine security permissions or because they're very close to the adjective enabled/disabled which sound like final states.

Reviewer 3: Oops, I just realized "allow/block" is used for groups in group filters but the same terms are use for projects in `import` :-(

> trying to adopt  'allow' and 'block' as consistent replacements for 'white' and 'black' in general here

I think that particular  "migration consistency" should have lower priority than all other "self-consistencies". What is its purpose, make search/replace easier? That would sound like a small and short-term gain.

Reviewer: I am not sure myself. I stand by the comments I've made, and @marc-hb and @tejlmand seem to align, but I can't say that I am convinced. Let me try to summarize so I can try to clarify it for myself and others:

1. Keep as-is:
   - groups can be allowed or blocked
   - projects are active or inactive
   - projects can be placed in an allowlist or blocklist when importing
2. Change to:
   - groups can be enabled or disabled
   - projects are active or inactive
   - projects can be placed in an allowlist or blocklist when importing

I think I prefer 2., because allowing or blocking has a ring to "external". You allow or block something that is defined externally and then you import or deal with. So that is very good for importing, because you are either allowing or blocking a project that is not controlled by you. But groups are described and managed in-manifest, so that is why I think enabling and disabling them makes more sense that allowing them or blocking them.

Reviewer 2: > * Keep as-is:
>   
>   * groups can be allowed or blocked
>   * projects are active or inactive
>   * projects can be placed in an allowlist or blocklist when importing
> 
> * Change to:
>   
>   * groups can be enabled or disabled
>   * projects are active or inactive
>   * projects can be placed in an allowlist or blocklist when importing

Thanks for this.
Thinking a bit more on this, I start to like 2. better and better, as it removes any ambiguity regarding `allow` / `block`.
`allow` is solely used in relation to import (`allowlist`), so will never be mixed up with groups in any way, as groups are enabled or disabled.

Author: OK, option 2. it is. I've updated to the documentation to match the code changes in https://github.com/zephyrproject-rtos/west/pull/466.

are *inactive*; west essentially ignores inactive projects unless explicitly
requested not to.

Project Groups
==============

> Inside ``manifest: projects:``, you can add a project to groups. The ``groups``

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Inside ``manifest: projects:``, you can add a project to one or more groups. The ``groups``
```

- ``project-3``: no groups

Project group names must not contain commas (,), colons (:), or whitespace.

Group names must not begin with a dash (-), but they may contain dashes
elsewhere in their names: ``foo-bar`` is a valid group name, but ``-foo-bar``
is not.

Group names are otherwise arbitrary strings. Group names are case sensitive.

As a restriction, no project may use both ``import:`` and ``groups:``. (This
avoids some edge cases whose semantics are difficult to specify.)

Active and Inactive Projects
============================

You can allow or block project groups in both your manifest file and
:ref:`west-config`.

All projects are *active* by default. A project is *inactive* if it has groups,
all of which are blocked. This is the only way to make a project inactive:
projects with no groups are active, as are projects with one or more allowed
groups.

Within the manifest file, the top level ``manifest: groups:`` value can be used
to block project groups. To block a group, prefix its name with a dash (-).

For example, in this manifest fragment:

.. code-block:: yaml

   manifest:
     groups: [-groupA,-groupB]

The groups named ``groupA`` and ``groupB`` are blocked.

> Groups are otherwise allowed by default.

Reviewer: I feel that the enabling/disabling of groups (or allowing/blocking in your current terms) should be featured at the beginning of this section, so the hierarchy is respected: first explain what it means to enable or disable groups, then explain what effect this has on projects themselves being active or inactive.

This ``groups`` list is also just an ordinary YAML list, so you could have also
written this fragment like this:

.. code-block:: yaml

   manifest:
     groups:
       - -groupA
       - -groupB

However, this syntax is harder to read and therefore discouraged.

Only the **top level manifest file's** ``manifest: groups:`` value has any
effect. The ``manifest: groups:`` values in any :ref:`imported manifests
<west-manifest-import>` are ignored.

In addition to the manifest file, you can control the project group allowlist
and blocklist using the ``manifest.groups`` configuration option. This option
is a comma-separated list of groups. To allow a group, add its name to the
list. To block a group, add its name prefixed by a dash (``-``). For example,
setting ``manifest.groups`` to ``groupA,-groupB`` allows ``groupA``, and blocks
``groupB``.

The value of the configuration option overrides any data in the manifest file.
You can think of this as if the ``manifest.groups`` configuration option is
appended to the ``manifest: groups:`` list from YAML, with "last entry wins"
semantics.

> 

Reviewer: Maybe mention here that there's a command-line option to west that has the highest precedence? So that users are aware of it when reading about groups.

Author: > Maybe mention here that there's a command-line option to west that has the highest precedence? So that users are aware of it when reading about groups.

I will document this in repo-tool.rst with the rest of the ``west update`` details if that's OK.

   manifest:
     projects:
       - name: foo
         groups:
           - groupA
       - name: bar
         groups:
           - groupA
           - groupB

     groups: [-groupA,-groupB]

     defaults:
       remote: example-remote
     remotes:
       - name: example-remote
         url-base: https://git.example.com

The ``manifest.groups`` configuration option is not set (you can ensure
this by running ``west config -D manifest.groups``).

Both ``foo`` and ``bar`` are inactive, because all of their groups are blocked.

Example 4: Blocking a group via configuration
---------------------------------------------

The entire manifest file is:

.. code-block:: yaml

   manifest:
     projects:
       - name: foo
         groups:
           - groupA
       - name: bar
         groups:
           - groupA
           - groupB

     defaults:
       remote: example-remote
     remotes:
       - name: example-remote
         url-base: https://git.example.com

The ``manifest.groups`` configuration option is set to ``-groupA`` (you can
ensure this by running ``west config manifest.groups -- -groupA``; the extra
``--`` is required so the argument parser does not treat ``-groupA`` as a

> command line option ``-g`` with value ``roupA``).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
command line option ``-g`` with value ``groupA``).
```

Author: No, this one is correct.

Reviewer: Yep, sorry my mistake.

     remotes:
       - name: example-remote
         url-base: https://git.example.com

The ``manifest.groups`` configuration option is set to ``groupA,groupB``
(you can ensure this by running ``west config manifest.groups
"groupA,groupB"``).

In this case, both ``groupA`` and ``groupB`` are allowed, because the
configuration value overrides the manifest file for both groups.

Therefore, projects ``foo`` and ``bar`` are both active.

Example 7: Blocking multiple groups via configuration
-----------------------------------------------------

The entire manifest file is:

.. code-block:: yaml

   manifest:
     projects:
       - name: foo
       - name: bar
         groups:
           - groupA
       - name: baz
         groups:
           - groupA
           - groupB

     defaults:
       remote: example-remote
     remotes:
       - name: example-remote
         url-base: https://git.example.com

The ``manifest.groups`` configuration option is set to ``-groupA,-groupB``
(you can ensure this by running ``west config manifest.groups --
"-groupA,-groupB"``).

In this case, both ``groupA`` and ``groupB`` are blocked.

Therefore, projects ``foo`` and ``bar`` are both inactive.

> 

Reviewer: I don't want to be a pain, but I think we should also include an example using the command-line option to `west update` here.

=================

This is the easiest way to use ``submodules``.

If ``submodules`` is ``true`` as a ``projects`` attribute, ``west update`` will
update the project's Git submodules whenever it updates the project itself. If
it's ``false`` or missing, it has no effect.

For example, let's say you have a source code repository ``foo``, which has
some submodules, and you want ``west update`` to keep all of them them in sync,
along with another project named ``bar`` in the same workspace.

You can do that with this manifest file:

.. code-block:: yaml

   manifest:
     projects:
       - name: foo
         submodules: true
       - name: bar

Here, ``west update`` will initialize and update all submodules in ``foo``. If
``bar`` has any submodules, they are ignored, because ``bar`` does not have a
``submodules`` value.

Option 2: List of mappings
==========================

The ``submodules`` key may be a list of mappings. Each element in the list
defines the name of the submodule to update, and the path -- relative to the
project's absolute path in the workspace -- to use for the submodule.

For example, let's say you have a source code repository ``foo``, which has

> many submodules, and you want ``west update`` to just keep one of them in sync,

Reviewer 4: After adding second submodule to example I would replace "one" with "two" or "few".

Author: Oh, nice catch, thanks. I changed to 'some but not all'.

        groups:
          - groupA
      - name: project-2
        groups:
          - groupB
          - groupC
      - name: project-3

The projects are in these groups:

- ``project-1``: one group, named ``groupA``
- ``project-2``: two groups, named ``groupB`` and ``groupC``
- ``project-3``: no groups

Project group names must not contain commas (,), colons (:), or whitespace.

Group names must not begin with a dash (-), but they may contain dashes
elsewhere in their names: ``foo-bar`` is a valid group name, but ``-foo-bar``
is not.

Group names are otherwise arbitrary strings. Group names are case sensitive.

As a restriction, no project may use both ``import:`` and ``groups:``. (This
avoids some edge cases whose semantics are difficult to specify.)

Allowed and Blocked Project Groups
==================================

You can allow or block project groups in both your manifest file and
:ref:`west-config`.

All groups are allowed by default.

Within the manifest file, the top level ``manifest: groups:`` value can be used
to block project groups. To block a group, prefix its name with a dash (-).
For example, in this manifest fragment:

.. code-block:: yaml

   manifest:

>      groups: [-groupA,-groupB]

Reviewer 3: I think this syntax should support `[-groupA,+groupB,-groupC]` even if `+groupB` is a no-op. This would make it consistent with `manifest.groups` below, possibly make some scripting easier and also make the key name less strange because this `groups` is actually a list of `blocked_groups` in disguise for now.

The groups named ``groupA`` and ``groupB`` are blocked.

This ``groups`` list is an ordinary YAML list, so you could have also written
this fragment like this:

.. code-block:: yaml

   manifest:
     groups:
       - -groupA
       - -groupB

However, this syntax is harder to read and therefore discouraged.

Only the **top level manifest file's** ``manifest: groups:`` value has any
effect. The ``manifest: groups:`` values in any :ref:`imported manifests
<west-manifest-import>` are ignored.

In addition to the manifest file, you can control the project group allowlist
and blocklist using the ``manifest.groups`` configuration option. This option
is a comma-separated list of groups. To allow a group, add its name to the
list. To block a group, add its name prefixed by a dash (``-``). For example,
setting ``manifest.groups`` to ``groupA,-groupB`` allows ``groupA``, and blocks

> ``groupB``.

Reviewer 3: Unless it's too late but I think `+groupA,-groupB` would be more "consistent" than `groupA,-groupB` and it would also make a clearer difference from the `groups` homonym at the project level. It may even be easier to script config files changes if anyone is into that.

Author: > Unless it's too late but I think `+groupA,-groupB` would be more "consistent" than `groupA,-groupB` and it would also make a clearer difference from the `groups` homonym at the project level. It may even be easier to script config files changes if anyone is into that.

I would like @carlescufi and @tejlmand to weigh in here. It's not too late, but we should make a decision quickly if we can.

Reviewer 2: > I would like @carlescufi and @tejlmand to weigh in here. It's not too late, but we should make a decision quickly if we can.

I like the proposal from @marc-hb.
Explicit having to do `+groupA` also remove the stupid user mistake of forgetting `-`, so he accidentially does `groupB` when he meant `-groupB`, `groupB` would throw an error at the user.
This greatly reduces one of those *doh* mistakes that can take time to track down.

Author: This alternate proposal requires us to forbid group names from starting with `+` or `-` -- are we OK with that?

Author: Sorry, to be more clear: they already can't start with `-`, but this would add `+` to the list of forbidden characters. I personally don't have issues with that, but want to get it out in front of people.

Reviewer: Yes, I also agree with this proposal, it is more consistent now that we've settled on using this add/remove list of projects. Let's go with it.

Reviewer 2: still agree to use `+groupA` and `-groupB` and thus restrict the use of `+` as first char of a group name.

       - name: baz
         groups:
           - groupA
           - groupB

     defaults:
       remote: example-remote
     remotes:
       - name: example-remote
         url-base: https://git.example.com

The ``manifest.groups`` configuration option is set to ``-groupA,-groupB``
(you can ensure this by running ``west config manifest.groups --
"-groupA,-groupB"``).

In this case, both ``groupA`` and ``groupB`` are blocked.

Therefore, projects ``foo`` and ``bar`` are both inactive.

.. _west-manifest-submodules:

Git Submodules in Projects
**************************

You can use the ``submodules`` keys briefly described :ref:`above
<west-manifest-files>` to force ``west update`` to also handle any `Git
submodules`_ configured in project's git repository. The ``submodules`` key can
appear inside ``projects``, like this:

.. code-block:: YAML

   manifest:
     projects:
       - name: some-project
         submodules: ...

The ``submodules`` key can be a boolean or a list of mappings. We'll describe
these in order.

Option 1: Boolean
=================

This is the easiest way to use ``submodules``.

If ``submodules`` is ``true`` as a ``projects`` attribute, ``west update`` will

> update the project's Git submodules whenever it updates the project itself. If

Reviewer 3: recursively

these in order.

Option 1: Boolean
=================

This is the easiest way to use ``submodules``.

If ``submodules`` is ``true`` as a ``projects`` attribute, ``west update`` will
recursively update the project's Git submodules whenever it updates the project
itself. If it's ``false`` or missing, it has no effect.

For example, let's say you have a source code repository ``foo``, which has
some submodules, and you want ``west update`` to keep all of them them in sync,
along with another project named ``bar`` in the same workspace.

You can do that with this manifest file:

.. code-block:: yaml

   manifest:
     projects:
       - name: foo
         submodules: true
       - name: bar

Here, ``west update`` will initialize and update all submodules in ``foo``. If
``bar`` has any submodules, they are ignored, because ``bar`` does not have a
``submodules`` value.

Option 2: List of mappings
==========================

The ``submodules`` key may be a list of mappings. Each element in the list
defines the name of the submodule to update, and the path -- relative to the
project's absolute path in the workspace -- to use for the submodule.

> 

Reviewer 2: Based on this comment https://github.com/zephyrproject-rtos/zephyr/pull/31241/files#r557368457, I think a very important piece of information is needed here.

```suggestion
The submodule will be updated recursively.

```

For example, let's say you have a source code repository ``foo``, which has
many submodules, and you want ``west update`` to keep some but not all of them
in sync, along with another project named ``bar`` in the same workspace.

You can do that with this manifest file:

.. code-block:: yaml

   manifest:
     projects:
       - name: foo
         submodules:
           - name: foo-first-sub
             path: path/to/foo-first-sub
           - name: foo-second-sub
             path: path/to/foo-second-sub
       - name: bar

> Here, ``west update`` will initialize and update just the submodules in ``foo``
> with paths ``path/to/foo-first-sub`` and ``path/to/foo-second-sub``. Any

Reviewer 2: Based on this comment https://github.com/zephyrproject-rtos/zephyr/pull/31241/files#r557368457, I think a very important piece of information is needed here:
```suggestion
Here, ``west update`` will initialize and update just the submodules in ``foo``
with paths ``path/to/foo-first-sub`` and ``path/to/foo-second-sub``.  ``path/to/foo-first-sub`` and ``path/to/foo-second-sub`` will also have their submodules updated recursively. Any
```

-------------------------------------------------

The entire manifest file is:

.. code-block:: yaml

   manifest:
     projects:
       - name: foo
         groups:
           - groupA
       - name: bar
         groups:
           - groupA
           - groupB

     groups: [-groupA,-groupB]

     defaults:
       remote: example-remote
     remotes:
       - name: example-remote
         url-base: https://git.example.com

The ``manifest.groups`` configuration option is not set (you can ensure
this by running ``west config -D manifest.groups``).

Both ``foo`` and ``bar`` are inactive, because all of their groups are
disabled.

Example 4: Disabling a group via configuration
----------------------------------------------

The entire manifest file is:

.. code-block:: yaml

   manifest:
     projects:
       - name: foo
         groups:
           - groupA
       - name: bar
         groups:
           - groupA
           - groupB

     defaults:
       remote: example-remote
     remotes:
       - name: example-remote
         url-base: https://git.example.com

The ``manifest.groups`` configuration option is set to ``-groupA`` (you can

> ensure this by running ``west config manifest.groups -- -groupA``; the extra

Reviewer 5: It seems to me that `--` parameter is mandatory when disabling a group but obligatory when enabling it.
Can we unify group enable and disable commands in terms of adding `--` ?

Author: > It seems to me that `--` parameter is mandatory when disabling a group but obligatory when enabling it.

I don't understand why you say it is "obligatory" when enabling. Did you mean to say "optional"?

> Can we unify group enable and disable commands in terms of adding `--` ?

I'm not sure what you're asking for. The extra `--` is just a POSIX thing to make sure that the string "-groupA" in the command line is treated as a positional argument.

https://unix.stackexchange.com/questions/11376/what-does-double-dash-mean

You could write `west config manifest.groups -- +foo` and it would set `manifest.groups` to `+foo`, but it's not necessary to use `--` in this case because `+foo` is not ambiguous: it is definitely a positional argument because it does not begin with `-`.

Reviewer 5: What I was asking about using the `west config manifest.groups -- +foo` command for adding group and  `west config manifest.groups -- -foo` for removing. It just seems more coherent to me. But the actual description is also good.

Author: I see, thanks for explaining.

I try to avoid using `--` in `west config` lines in the documentation unless they are really necessary, because I don't want people to think that the ugly syntax is always required. The `--` is only needed when dealing with strings that start with `-`, so that is where I'd like to keep it. This is consistent with other places in the documentation, like here:

https://docs.zephyrproject.org/latest/guides/west/build-flash-debug.html#permanent-cmake-arguments
